So right now Pico can fall,
you know what Pico can't do?
Jump, right?
So let's figure it out, and we're
gonna do it in a separate project, but
we're gonna figure out that mechanic where
we know how to make things go down, but
you know what they say,
what goes down must go up.
>> Wait.
>> [LAUGH] And then go back down again,
[LAUGH] right?
it's a joke, [LAUGH].
So let's create a character.
It can be Pico, it can be somebody else.
Let's talk a little bit about how to jump,
cuz right now we only know down,
we only know velocity that increases.
Jumping is basically a combination
of velocity goes up and
then velocity goes down, right?
And so if you think about this, when you
throw a ball up into the air, it leaves
your hand pretty fast and it slows down
until it doesn't have any more energy.
And then it turns around and
gravity takes over and then it's falling.
So what we need to do is have something
go up so that it then can go down.
All right, let's look a little
at this idea of jumping.
Do we want another one or somebody else?
>> Somebody else.
>> Try Nano.
>> Nano's not-
>> Or whatever his name is.
>> Pico?
>> No, Nano.
>> Nano doesn't really
have a jumping motion.
I mean,
that could be a jumping motion, right?
All right, let's do it.
>> That's what I used for the apple one.
>> All right,
Nano's got some jump action here.
All right, so
have this concept of falling, and
we have this concept of falling
with velocity, all right?
So we wanna do a jump.
There's two ways to think about the jump,
there is, like we saw before,
have a known number where you
know where you start, right?
And so right now, let's just make
Nano's life a little bit easier,
let's say negative 100, right?
So we know that the theoretical
ground that Nano stands on Is at
negative 100, right?
And the things that we need to figure
out is how high can Nano jump, right?
And then what we wanna do is
go determine that height,
figure out how high that jump is, and
then go back down to that start point.
And again, this will work when there's
a known ground that doesn't change,
which is the first one to kinda do,
cuz it gets trickier after this, and
we'll have to do some math to
get a real platformer working.
Cuz you don't wanna run into walls,
you might have multiple floors.
There will be some math, I'm warning you
all, but it's predominantly addition and
subtraction with a little bit of division
and multiplication at various points.
We will not go into trigonometry today,
friends.
We'll save that exploration for
a different day.
All right, so we wanna figure out how
to make a jumping motion because we
know that shooting them up and
shooting him back down isn't great.
So we could just say,
let's try something like this.
Let's say, when the green flag is pressed,
it could be a different
button at some point.
Actually, we'll make it the space key,
how about that?
But let's make a game loop once again.
And we'll say, so we're trying to see
if that space key is pressed, right?
Cool, I will zoom in a little bit.
That's the wrong zoom in.
If the space key is pressed,
we could just simply have him go up and
then go down, right, and it'll work.
>> Go down until it hit something, though.
>> Or eventually we'll do with
our ground detection first and
then we'll do it with ground detection,
right?
And so we could say something like,
we'll do something very similar
to what we do with the falling.
We'll say, hey, for 10 times,
what we wanna do is change y by 1,
this is gonna feel okay.
And then we will wait,
you like half a second, right, Caleb?
Half seconds feels good?
I'll just do it.
>> You can't just jump to-
>> You can't just jump and
shoot it right back down.
That doesn't work.
And then we could say something like-
>> You can't double jump.
>> At one point we will
be able to unfortunately,
even though we don't want to.
So actually want to change y.
Yeah, and then we will go ahead and
we will change y by negative 1.
And this is gonna have
our same velocity issue.
That jump, that jump isn't much.
>> Use weak legs.
>> I mean, and
then we change the values, [LAUGH].
We can change the values.
So we can either have happened more,
which will be a bigger jump but slower,
or we can have 10 but
by increments of 10, right?
I mean, that is a jumping mechanism.
>> Oops.
>> I don't feel good about it, but
it exists, all right?
It works.
It is a jump.
I think that we can do better.
If we take in this idea of
velocity that we had before,
then we could theoretically have
them start up high, slow down and
then come to the ground
just like the falling.
>> I think this should be point two.
>> Yeah, I also agree with you that he was
hanging in the air a little bit too long.
>> He was floating.
>> He's floating for a second, right?
I think we had some velocity,
it will be a little bit happier.
All right, let's trash that.
Okay, before when we had that velocity,
we stored in a variable,
does that make sense?
I'm just gonna rename this one.
Actually, I don't know if that's,
it could be for everyone.
And so we'll go ahead and we'll call
this one, you can call it Velocity Y,
you can call it Speed Y.
What do we like, Speed Y or Velocity Y?
>> Can I call it jump?
>> Because it's gonna change, whether or
not he's jumping, you could call it jump.
>> Speed, velocity.
Speed, okay.
Let's pick speed.
Speed Y, cuz it's gonna be
the direction that we should go.
So when the game starts,
we do wanna set Speed Y to 0 just
to set everything the way it was.
And then theoretically in our game loop,
we should be,
Changing the y, By whatever that speed is.
If it's positive, he goes up.
It's negative, he goes down, right?
And so,
now what we could do is we could say.
So, we changed every time and
then if the space key is pressed,
I get error, let's put it over here.
If the space key is pressed,
then what we'll do is
we will set y to, let's start with 10.
Let's try that one out.
And again, we might need to adjust.
Not changed by 10, no,
we wanna set it to 10.
>> Is it set or changed?
>> We wanna set it to 10 and
I'll show you why in a second.
Now, immediately you're
gonna see what happens.
Let's just say I'm gonna put in the code
that puts Nano back to where he's supposed
to go when I hit the green flag for
reasons that you will very quickly see.
Hit the spacebar.
So it set my variable to 10, yeah.
My variable, Speed Y.
And away we go.
>> [LAUGH].
>> Not what we wanted.
>> [LAUGH], like I said before,
what goes up ideally should
come back down, right?
>> It's not what you said at first,
but okay.
>> I was setting myself up for the joke
of, yeah, we did down and then goes up,
right?
Okay, so we've got that.
So now what we probably need to
do is to have him come down,
which is what we can do is over time,
decrease that speed.
So we could, every iteration, We could
go ahead and we could then just change,
let me get rid of my variable before
it messes me up one more time.
>> Up to the moon.
>> We can do it by, Negative 0.5.
So he will fall to gravity,
he can jump, but
he will, Fall to what seems like oblivion,
but Scratch will stop him.
But he's got a hopping motion, and
you could see that over time, so
it is slowing down and then down he goes.
Sets to 10, and that number will keep
going down, but it doesn't really matter.
>> Why Nano is acting like flappy bird?
>> I mean, that seems cool.
Also you can hit space multiple times and
he will-
>> Like Kirby-
>> He will Kirby himself,
Kirby flappy bird, right?
>> Not too much like Kirby,
Kirby falls down slower-
>> Kirby's got a little bit of a-
>> He's a big balloon.
He's got a little bit air to him, right?
So that could work, if we know the actual
amount to, so like in this case,
what we could is we could repeat it
a certain amount of times slowing down as
time goes on.
So we could, for instance,
move this out for a second.
We could set it to 10.
And then we could come back down, there
is a bunch of different mechanics here.
We could do a touching
color here though as well.
We could say, let's try this out.
I'm winging it for a second here.
>> If touching color-
>> Exactly, you read my mind.
>> If touching color like black,
completely black.
You could outline everything with black
no matter what color it would be.
I know it'd always land on it, so
then you don't need to do multiple colors.
Think that's smart.
>> Unless he's got a black wall and
then he can't jump, [LAUGH].
Life's hard.
Let's start with this.
>> It'll work.
>> Let's try it, we're winging it now.
We'll say if touching color,
what do we choose, black?
>> Black.
If touching color, black.
I'm thinking we can, Set Speed Y to 0,
otherwise-
>> And make for he can jump again somehow.
>> Put it there.
We should probably give
ourselves some black, right?
Push that all the way down.
>> Then you can make
a nice platformer game.
Where did 1 go?
>> Make for he can jump only when
he's touching the color black.
>> So we got a jumping motion.
Again, he does fall a little
bit beneath the ground but
it does for
the most part get us most of the effect.
We give him a general starting point
which might not be perfect anymore.
So I look at where he is now,
let's say negative 149-
>> And then we can make if he's touching
a certain color, that can be like lava or
something or spikes, whatever you want.
>> Yeah, you can have red be lava.
That's a good color for lava and
you can say that will stop the game, or
black x hits the ground, right?
There's a bunch of tricks
that we can do here.
And then we can combine this.
So we've got a decent jumping motion now.
All right, Ashley,
you wanna step through this code?
>> Yeah.
>> All right, let's step through it.
All right, follow along with me.
When the green flag is clicked,
we give him some starting location,
is that starting location
a good starting location?
>> It doesn't have a starting.
>> Okay, perfect.
We set the y speed to zero just
as the initialization, all right?
Go into the game loop.
By definition, he's not jumping, right?
If the space key is pressed,
we set y to 10 and we start 10.
But then theoretically,
if he's not touching the color,
then that becomes 9.5, then 9, then 8.5.
He slows, he jumps less and
less and less and less and less.
>> The only thing we haven't
made is left and right.
>> Yeah, well, we're gonna make a game
where he jumps over things, whatever,
we can let them do left and
right here too.
>> And I just noticed you can hold
the space key to make him jump as high as
you want.
>> So how do we fix that?
How do we make sure he
can't rocket into oblivion?
>> We can still flappy bird?
>> You can still flappy bird.
You want to fix that?
I think we should fix that?
Do we have any hypotheses how to-
>> You can still put black at
the top of your screen?
>> Well, that means he could hit his head.
But what if I don't want to
even let him double jump?
>> Just make only when,
so you can only press,
only the space key works if
you're touching the color.
Okay, so you know that if,
oops, Space key pressed,
then you can do that and
touching the color black.
>> So let's try that out.
>> So we'll do the-
>> That only works if he's touching black.
Cuz then he won't be able to go up anymore
unless he's still touching the color
black.
Yeah, so let's try it out.
So if this and that, so
Space key is pressed, and
we are touching the color, Black.
This will be interesting because I think
we can also get to a point where we're
also touching and setting it to zero,
but we'll find out.
Yep, that'll work.
Another way to do it is if you look,
that totally works.
Let's just talk about other ways, right?
When he's not jumping, what's his y speed?
Zero When he is jumping,
it is a number, right?
And so you could try to see,
there is a slight moment in time at
the top of the jump where it
might also be zero, right, where
you could theoretically pull off a rare
double jump, so this is probably better.
Another way is to go back on that number.
The other option is to have
a variable that you turn on and
off when he's jumping, all right?
So if currently jumping, ignore this.
It all depends on what you need to do.
For this, I think we should keep
this cuz I think this works.
So let's go with this mechanic right now.
I do wanna have him next
costume if he's jumping for
my own, I just wanna see
what it looks like honestly.
Put in there.
>> I have him when you start he just
falls out of the top of the screen.
>> This is his jump motion.
>> When he starts he just falls
off out of the [INAUDIBLE].
>> So we've got something here, he jumps,
looks like he's eating a taco which
is I think apropos for the day.
That's probably not what this Sprite was
necessarily used for but I appreciate it.
>> I like it-
>> You were the one who said it was good
for jumping.
>> And I stand by that.
[LAUGH] I think it was the right choice.
I am here for it.